Babelfish 0.9 - chat translation for FulDC++
============================================

Translates what you write into English before it is sent.

Named after Douglas Adams's fish: you put it in your ear and everybody makes
sense. You do not have to know that to use it.


How you use it
--------------

  Ctrl+G   in the message box    translate into English and send
  Ctrl+G   in the chat window     translate the line you clicked, for you only
  Enter                          send exactly what you typed
  Shift+Enter, Ctrl+Enter        line break (the client's own, left alone)

That is the whole thing. There is no mode to switch on and no indicator to
check, so there is no way to accidentally send a translation to somebody who was
expecting your own language. Writing in your own language is still what Enter
does.

Built a message over several lines? Ctrl+G translates the whole block in one go
and keeps the line breaks.

While the translation is being fetched you will see your original in the window
with an arrow in front of it. That is only for you - it is not sent anywhere.

Not in a private conversation, though. The client only lets a plugin write a
line of its own into a hub's main chat, never into a private window, so the echo
of a private message used to turn up in main chat - the right words in a window
you did not mean them for. There is no echo for private messages now. The
message itself is unaffected and goes where you sent it.


Reading what other people write
-------------------------------

Click a line in the chat window and press Ctrl+G. The translation appears just
below it as a system line:

  <mango> jag kan stava till hashpipa jag med
  *** mango: i can spell hashpipe too

That line is only in your window. Nothing is sent, and the person who wrote it
is none the wiser.

This goes the other way from everything else: into the language you read, not
into English. Only the lines you ask for are translated - a busy hub would cost
a fortune otherwise, and you would not read most of it anyway.

It works on messages that arrived while the plugin was loaded, and remembers the
last hundred. Older lines cannot be traced back to their hub and are left alone,
with a note saying so.

Note that installing a new version restarts the plugin and empties that memory,
so every line already on screen becomes untranslatable at once. Nothing is
wrong; the next message to arrive works normally.

One thing to know: MyMemory cannot work out what language a line is in, so it is
told to expect English. That is right for most of these hubs and wrong for an
Italian line, which will simply come back untranslated. Claude, DeepL, Azure and
Google all work it out themselves, and are the ones to use if the people you
read write in more than one language.


Setting up
----------

Nothing to set up. The plugin works the moment it is installed: it reads which
language Windows is in and translates from that into English, using MyMemory's
free service, which needs no account and no key.

The free tier allows about 5 000 characters a day per address. A chat message is
around 60 characters, so that is roughly 80 messages a day. Adding your e-mail
address raises it to 50 000, or about 800:

  /tr email you@example.com

The address is only sent to MyMemory, and only as part of the translation
request.


Commands
--------

Type these in any chat window. /bf works everywhere /tr does, and /tr help
prints the whole list without you having to come back here.

  /tr help                list every command
  /tr status              which backend, which language, how much of today's
                          allowance is gone, how often the cache is hitting
  /tr from de             change the language you write in
  /tr once <text>         translate and send one message
  /tr echo off            stop showing the original locally while it is fetched
  /tr log                 print the plugin's recent log into this window
  /tr limit 20000         daily character cap; 0 turns it off
  /tr keep polsa          never translate this word (see below)
  /tr cache clear         empty the phrase cache

  /tr auto on             translate everything on this hub without Ctrl+G
  /tr pm off              keep automatic mode out of private messages

Automatic mode is off until you ask for it, and is easier to set from Configure,
where the hubs you are on are listed with a tick box each.

You do not have to remember any of this. Open the client's plugin list, select
Babelfish and press Configure: the language is a list of language names in your
own language, and the service, key and the two switches are there as well. The
hubs you are on are listed there with a tick box each, for automatic mode.


Writing in a third language
---------------------------

The plugin assumes you write in the language Windows is in. If you write one
message in something else, put the language code in front of it and press
Ctrl+G:

  de: ich verstehe nicht

This changes what you are translating *from*. What you translate *into* is
always English. The prefix is only read when a translation is actually
happening, so with plain Enter it is sent as ordinary text.

To change it for good, use the Configure dialog rather than trying to remember
the code.


Using your own translation service
----------------------------------

MyMemory is free but not the best. If you have a key of your own, DeepL gives
noticeably better Swedish, and Claude handles slang and tone best of all.

  /tr backend deepl
  /tr key <your key>

Backends: mymemory, azure, deepl, google, claude. Azure also needs the region
its key belongs to:

  /tr backend azure
  /tr key <your key>
  /tr region westeurope

No key is built into the plugin, and none is ever sent anywhere except to the
service you chose. There is no quiet fallback either: if the service you picked
fails, your own words are sent unchanged and the reason goes in /tr log.

/tr status ends with the service that last actually answered, so you can tell
what you are paying for rather than what you selected.


What is never translated
------------------------

  - anything starting with /, + or ! (client and hub commands), except /me
  - magnet links, TTH hashes and file names
  - messages that already look like English
  - anything under four characters

  - anything you have added with /tr keep

That last one is for words that come back wrong rather than not at all. "polsa"
was translated as "hot dog", and then the correction "nej, polsa" went out as
"no, sausage" - the service had found "polse", which is Danish for sausage, and
was quite sure of itself. Nothing came back broken-looking, so there was no
sign anything was wrong; the sentence was simply about a different meal.

You cannot know in advance which words do this. So the list is meant to be
added to afterwards, one word at a time, as each one gives itself away:

  /tr keep polsa          leave it alone from now on
  /tr keep -polsa         let it be translated again
  /tr keep                show the list

The word is taken out of the message before it is sent and put back afterwards,
which is what already happens to nicknames. It has to be three characters or
more, and it matches whole words only - keeping "polsa" does not keep "polsan".

Changing the list empties the phrase cache. It has to: a phrase already
translated is answered from the cache before any of this runs, so without that
the word you just protected would keep coming back translated and the setting
would look broken.

The four-character rule applies even when you press Ctrl+G. A very short phrase is a
near-certain hit on somebody's junk contribution in a shared translation memory:
"hej" once came back as an entire e-mail template, and it was duly sent to the
hub. That is also why every result is now checked before it goes out - anything
carrying markup, or wildly longer than what you wrote, is thrown away and your
original is sent instead.


When something goes wrong
-------------------------

Your original is sent unchanged. The plugin never silently drops what you wrote.
If the daily allowance runs out it says so in the chat window rather than
quietly reverting to your own language, and /tr log will have the reason.

If a service hands the text straight back untranslated, that almost always means
it was told the wrong source language - Polish typed while the plugin still
thinks you write Swedish, say. It says so once per session and points at the
fix. Nothing is cached in that case, so correcting the language works
immediately.


Known limitations
-----------------

  - Automatic per-hub mode is off until you tick a hub. It is the only mode
    that sends without you asking, so start somewhere harmless.
  - All five services have been used against a live hub for sending. Reading
    has been tried on Claude and Azure, on other people's lines as well as your
    own, but not yet on Google or DeepL.
  - Translation quality on short phrases and on /me actions is whatever the free
    service gives you. "dricker kaffe" came back as "They drink coffee!".
  - Nicks are taken out of a message before it is translated and put back after,
    using the hub's user list. If a service loses the placeholder, your original
    is sent instead - a message missing somebody's name is worse than one that
    was never translated.


Files
-----

  babelfish-cache.txt      phrases already translated, so they cost nothing
                           the second time. Safe to delete.
  babelfish-settings.txt   your language, service, key and the rest.

Both live in the plugin's own folder. Settings are kept there, rather than only
in the client's own Plugins.xml, for two reasons: a file written the moment you
change something cannot be lost by a client that dies before it saves, and the
API key stays out of Plugins.xml, which sits in your Documents folder and is
quite likely being synced to somebody's cloud. Everything that is not a key is
mirrored into the client's configuration as well.

That folder is named after the plugin's id rather than its name, so it stayed
where it was when the plugin was renamed from Translate. A translate-settings.txt
left over from before is read once, so the key you typed in survives, and is then
left alone.

Installing a new version empties that folder, and it also clears the plugin's
settings inside the client's own configuration - both plugins lose everything
they had stored. So after an update you may have to set the language and tick
the hubs again.

API keys are the exception, and only since this version. They are kept in
Windows Credential Manager, which belongs to Windows rather than to the client
and is left alone by anything the client does. You can see them yourself:
Control Panel, Credential Manager, Windows Credentials, listed as
"Babelfish/claude" and so on. Deleting one there is the same as clearing it
here.


Licence
-------

GPLv3 or later. See LICENSE.
